docs: Add 12-factor how-to on using observability (#2232)
canonical/charmcraft: docs/howto/manage-web-app-charms/use-web-app-charm.rst

can be run multiple times) and that it can be run on multiple units simultaneously
without issue. Handling multiple migration scripts that run concurrently
can be achieved by, for example, locking any tables during the migration.

Use observability
-----------------

First, :ref:`integrate your web app with the Canonical Observability
Stack <integrate_web_app_cos>`.

View Grafana dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To view the dashboard, get the endpoints:

Reviewer: I'm not sure endpoints makes sense here, perhaps we should say "login details of Grafana" or something like that?

Author: I placed the part about endpoints into a separate section called `Get Grafana login details`

.. code-block::

    juju show-unit catalogue/0 | grep url
    juju run grafana/leader get-admin-password

These commands output URLs and the default admin password. Look for the URL
with the Grafana postfix with the syntax
``http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana``. Here, ``JUJU_MODEL_NAME``
is the name of the Juju model on which you deployed your web app.

Append the ``/dashboards``
postfix to the URL and log in using the admin password to view the dashboards
overview page.

To view the specific dashboard for your web app, click :guilabel:`General` and
then on :guilabel:`WebApp Operator`, where "WebApp" is a stand-in for the

> framework of your web app.

Reviewer: Should we also explain what each of the graphs shows? This is also more for Flask and Django for now since for the others I don't think we have anything there by default

Author: I'll add a sentence providing some examples of the graphs shown, and also specify that these are default for Flask and Django only.

Do you think we should explain all of the graphs? How likely or often will these graphs be updated?

Reviewer: I think we should give a high level overview, the details of each graph can be explained in the graph itself, I think there is an information button on them

Author: Sounds good, I added a list of the graphs that I could see in the tracing blog post and added descriptions for some of them. Not very clear to me what the "2XX Rate" and "Request duration percentile" graphs are -- and let me know if you have comments on the other descriptions :)

Reviewer: The 2xx rate is the portion of responses that were in the 200 range, i.e., that worked. 3xx is the portion of responses that were redirects, 4XX is the portion that are client errors and 5xx are server errors.

Request duration percentile are the request duration lengths at a given percentile when you rank them from slowest to fastest. So the 50th percentile means that 50% of the requests lasted this amount of time or less, similarly for the rest. Does that make sense?

Author: Thanks for explaining! I'll update the list

View application logs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Go to ``http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana/explore``.

Reviewer: Is it clear to the reader where they would get the IP address?

Author: It's a good idea to clarify where the IP address comes from. 

Do you get the IP from `juju status`? Or is it an IP address that's output when the user runs `juju show-unit catalogue/0 | grep url`?

(I tried deploying a Django app with observability to test it myself, but Canonistack wasn't working and `cos-lite` isn't compatible with ARM)

Reviewer: `juju show-unit catalogue/0 | grep url` is correct yes

Author: Thanks, I made that more explicit in the text

At the top of the page, set the label filters to ``juju_application`` and then
pick ``JUJU_MODEL_NAME`` from the dropdown menu on the right.

> To view the logs, click :guilabel:`Run query`.

Reviewer: Do you think we should explain the logs a bit here? Which logs are being shown?

Author: Sure, I added a sentence about the logs shown in the [tracing support Discourse post](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/web-app-development-support-for-tracing/16842). Are there other logs we should mention?

Reviewer: thats all the logs, the logs I believe appear for all the frameworks, the dashboard only for gunicorn based ones (Flask and Django)

Author: Thanks, I'll update the sentence to make it clear that the logs depend on the web app framework

can be run multiple times) and that it can be run on multiple units simultaneously
without issue. Handling multiple migration scripts that run concurrently
can be achieved by, for example, locking any tables during the migration.

Use observability
-----------------

First, :ref:`integrate your web app with the Canonical Observability
Stack <integrate_web_app_cos>`.

> Get Grafana login details

Reviewer 2: To me this section is more about:

```suggestion
Connect to the Grafana service
```

Am I on the right track?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> View the endpoints by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Retrieve the observability endpoints and the password of the default Grafana
admin account:
```

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

    juju show-unit catalogue/0 | grep url

>     juju run grafana/leader get-admin-password

Reviewer 2: What do you think about splitting the steps between these two lines? To me these feel like separate actions.

> These commands output URLs and the default admin password. Look for the URL
> with the Grafana postfix with the syntax
> ``http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana``. Here, ``JUJU_MODEL_NAME``
> is the name of the Juju model on which you deployed your web app.

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to consider spreading this out a bit more. Something like this:

```suggestion
From the list of URLs, look for the endpoint that contains a ``grafana`` suffix.
It has the format:

.. terminal::

    http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana

Here, ``<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>`` is the name of the Juju model on which you deployed
your web app.
```

> View Grafana dashboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access the Grafana web app
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To view the dashboard, append the ``/dashboards``
> postfix to the URL and log in using the admin password to view the dashboards
> overview page.

Reviewer 2: I personally think "suffix" is more user-friendly, but YMMV.

```suggestion
To view the dashboard, append the ``/dashboards``
suffix to the URL and log in with the admin account. The dashboards overview
opens.
```

To view the specific dashboard for your web app, click :guilabel:`General` and
then on :guilabel:`WebApp Operator`, where "WebApp" is a stand-in for the

> framework of your web app.

Reviewer 2: A minor point, but I don't find that the look/feel of `guilabel` is in line with the small bits we have in the style guide about [documenting UI](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#interacting-with-ui-elements). I suppose there's nothing we can do about the theme here, but I would personally be fine if we used simple bold.

For Flask and Django apps, the dashboard displays default graphs such as:

* Requests: Number of requests over time.
* Status code count: Number of requests broken by responses status code.
* Requests per second: Number of requests per second over time.
* 2XX Rate: Portion of responses that were successful (in the 200 range).
* 3XX Rate: Portion of responses that were redirects (in the 300 range).
* 4XX Rate: Portion of responses that were client errors (in the 400 range).
* 5XX Rate: Portion of responses that were server errors (in the 500 range).
* Request average duration: Average duration of the requests over time.
* Request duration percentile: The 50th, 90th, and 99th percentile of all the
  request duration lengths after sorting them from slowest to fastest. For
  example, the 50th percentile represents the length of time (or less) that

>   50\% of the requests lasted.

Reviewer 2: This feels like reference information that belongs in the COS docs. Do we need it here?

View application logs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Go to ``http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana/explore``, where
the URL is the one you fetched after running

> ``juju show-unit catalogue/0 | grep url``.

Reviewer 2: We probably won't need to remind the reader of the specific command, at least in the way the section is currently structured.

Author: Sounds good, I'll remove the specific command

> At the top of the page, set the label filters to ``juju_application`` and then
> pick ``JUJU_MODEL_NAME`` from the dropdown menu on the right.
> To view the logs, click :guilabel:`Run query`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filter for the label ``juju_application`` and then
select your Juju model name from the dropdown.
Then, click :guilabel:`Run query`.
```

``http://<IP_ADDRESS>/<JUJU_MODEL_NAME>-grafana``. Here, ``JUJU_MODEL_NAME``
is the name of the Juju model on which you deployed your web app.

View Grafana dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To view the dashboard, append the ``/dashboards``
postfix to the URL and log in using the admin password to view the dashboards
overview page.

To view the specific dashboard for your web app, click :guilabel:`General` and
then on :guilabel:`WebApp Operator`, where "WebApp" is a stand-in for the
framework of your web app.

For Flask and Django apps, the dashboard displays default graphs such as:

* Requests: number of requests over time

> * Status code count: the number of requests with the 200 status code

Reviewer: I think if there were other status codes it would show them as well. So this part of the chart is the count of requests broken by response status code

Author: Good to know! I'll update
